A.1.1	Problem Summary

As previously mentioned, earthquakes represent a total menace to the world, causing total devastation to communities worldwide and damages tallied in the billions. But unlike hurricanes, science and disaster agencies have no way to predict them and provide communities enough time to shelter and protect themselves. Seismologists and relief agencies have been working in concert to devise a prediction mechanism, but, as of now, despite decades of research on the subject, computing resources a hundred times more powerful than half a century ago, and terabytes of data on the subject, we are no closer to finding a solution, and, in a way, are exactly where we were 50, 60 years ago. 

A.1.2	Application Benefits

An earthquake prediction tool would be a total game changer, providing the USGS, emergency and relief agencies a definite edge in helping communities worldwide shield themselves from the devastation caused by earthquakes. Fenn (2014) contends that the 2014 9.1-magnitude Sumatra, Indonesia quake resulted in 230,000 deaths and missing at a cost of $13.11 billion material and insurance losses in all the affected countries, $4.4 billion of which were incurred by Indonesia alone. The 2011 9.0-magnitude Fukushima Daiichi, Japan earthquake sent a 50-foot tsunami crashing inland with virtually no warning, flooding more than 500 square miles, killing close to 20,000 people, destroying a million businesses and homes, and making 300,000 people homeless in the process (Conca, 2019). Conca also estimated that Japan will incur upward of $200 billion to reinstate its energy producing capacities to pre-earthquake level, over $60 billion in refugee compensation costs, and close to $15 billion in clean-up costs till 2030. Though early predictions could not have prevented the substantial damage to infrastructure, it would have prevented such a large number of deaths and would have definitely allow for a more orderly evacuation process. It is estimated that 1,000 lives were lost during the haphazard evacuation that resulted from the tsunami (Conca, 2019). Predictions could have allowed for proper evacuation mitigating in the process the $60 billion in refugee compensation costs that Japan incurred post-disaster. With the app, future communities can prevent such losses.

A.1.3	Outline of the Data Product

Prophecy was developed using Python along with its associated external libraries, mostly because of its significant built-in data statistics resources. Programming/development language(s) used was and Tensorflow.js. More specifically, we are using Python 3.10 along with Tensorflow.js. and default Python libraries. For the Database Management System, we used Panada, Numpy, Matplotlib, Comma-separated values (.csv) file.

A.1.4	Data Used in the Data Product

As stated in various parts of this document, the public data used to develop this app, the Significant Earthquakes 1965-2016 Database, was downloaded from Kaggle.com. It is submitted with this project as Source Data.csv. It was cleaned using the attached code, also submitted with this document, as, and then saved as Cleaned Data.csv (please see attached). Each file contains more than 20,000 records detailing various information on all major earthquakes over half a century, from 1965 to 2016. The raw data came with no primary key for the records, but, if needed, the date, time, longitude and latitude can be combined to form a unique identifier. 

A.1.5	Objective and Hypothesis

The primary objective of this application is to provide an app that can predict the occurrence of an earthquake at an 80% accuracy rate or better in order to prevent loss of life, mitigate damage to property and infrastructure, and allow for adequate disaster planning and recovery, and targeted relief efforts. Prediction implies date, time, and location. The hypothesis is that, using historical earthquake data, artificial intelligence, and the latest machine learning techniques, the app can “learn” to detect the factors most likely to trigger an earthquake along with its location.

A.1.6	Methodology
The primary predictive/prescriptive method is the use of neural networks to analyze the Latitude, Longitude, and Timestamp, to predict the date of the next earthquake. In a non-convolutional neural network, the network’s input nodes are simply the location and time of each earthquake. This simple approach works, but the accuracy of each prediction will be low due to the magnitude of white nose in the data. To make a network’s predictions more accurate, only earthquakes with a magnitude 5.5 or higher from 1965 to 2016.  The AI will analyze the data with a convolutional neural network.